# Natural Disaster Detection Through Crisis Mapping and Social Media Data

Human lives, infrastructure, and the global economies face natural disasters continuously which are the most significant risks to the world. It is hard to get information and local contextual information, with traditional disaster detection methods that mostly rely on official reports and sensors. For disaster events identification and understanding, social media platforms have multiplied, and usergenerated content has become a significant supplementary data source. Improving disaster mapping techniques and natural disaster detection by using CrisisNLP dataset is the goal of this research. The system uses NLP techniques to classify and extract useful information from a large amount of unstructured social media data. Using labelled tweets related to disasters, the study builds and evaluates a variety of machine learning models, including Logistic Regression, Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forest, and Naive Bayes, as well as deep learning models, including BERT and LSTM. The performance of each model was evaluated using classification accuracy, with accuracy levels of 94% for BERT, 93% for LSTM, 88% for Logistic Regression, 92% for SVM, 95% for Random Forest, and 81% for Naive Bayes. The suggested framework shows the integration of social media and data-driven methods to improve disaster detection systems. These models help improve crisis management initiatives by providing insights to emergency responders and decision-makers.
